
1. Student A is strong enough to push a book across a table.
Then, student B comes along and presses downward on the book.
With student B pressing downward, student A is NOT strong enough to push the book.
Why not?

A. Student B pressing downwards increased the normal force between the book and the table, increasing the frictional force on the book.
B. Student B pressing downwards increased the inertia of the book.
C. Student B pressing downwards increased the coefficients of friction on the book, making it harder to push.
D.

2. A student sees the following problem...
...

The student completes the problem and finds the frictional force is xxx.
They are confused to see the frictional force is _greater_ than the applied force.
What is happening?
A. The student solved the problem incorrectly.
B. The teacher who wrote the problems used numbers that are impossible.
C. The block is slowing down rather than speeding up.
D. The block is moving at a constant velocity.


3. Block problems typically involve some number of these five forces: gravity, normal force, applied force, kinetic friction, static friction.
A 'constraint force' is a force which adjusts its value to limit the motion of an object.
Which two of the forces listed are constraint forces?
(note: applied force _could_ be viewed as a constraint force, based on the goals of the person who is applying the force.)
A. normal force and static friction
B. normal force and kinetic friction
C. normal force and gravity
D. gravity and static friction
E. gravity and kinetic friction
F. static and kinetic friction


4. In most problems about pushing blocks, the applied force and the KINETIC friction force act in opposite directions.
However, they could act in the same direction. In which of the situations below do they act in the same direction?
A. A heavy box is sliding across ice and a person is trying to stop it.

5. In most problems about pushing blocks, the applied force and the STATIC friction force act in opposite directions.
However, they could act in the same direction. In which of the situations below do they act in the same direction?
A. Someone is trying to prevent a heavy box from sliding down a ramp.

6. A person is climbing up a rock using hiking boots. Which frictional force acts on the person's boots?
A. kinetic friction, because the person is moving.
B. static friction, because, even though the person is moving, they are not sliding.



