
What does the Greek word planetes mean?
A. wanderer
B. sphere
C. large mass
D. orbit


The ancient greek definition of a planet given by the ancient greeks and romans was:
A. An object that appears in a different points in the celestial sphere
B. A large spherical mass orbiting the sun
C. A large spherical mass moving in an ellipse around the earth
D. Any large mass in space.


Retrograde Motion refers to what phenomenon:
A. A planet moving across the sky appears turn backwards
B. A planet slows down, stops, and reverses direction
C. A planet begins slowing down
D. The earth slows down, stops, and reverses direction


The explanation for retrograde motion in the Ptolomeic universe was:
A. Planets are moving in a small circles within a larger circle.
B. The earth changed direction while orbiting.
C. The sun changed the direction it is spinning.
D. The planet slowed down, stopped, and reversed direction due to the force of gravity.


The explanation for retrograde motion in the Copernican universe is:
A. Planets are moving in a small circles within a larger circle.
B. The earth changed direction while orbiting.
C. The sun changed the direction it is spinning.
D. The planet slowed down, stopped, and reversed direction due to the force of gravity.


For most of history, people believed the planets Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn must move in circles.
Kepler discovered that:
A. They did indeed move in circles
B. The move in ellipses, not circles, but the ellipses are nearly circular.
C. The move in ellipses, not circles, and the ellipses are highly eccentric (non-circular).
D. They move in a square, not a circle

From the Renaissance to the 2006 IAU meeting, the term "planet" was not precisely defined.
The closest thing to a definition was:
A. An object that appears in a different points in the celestial sphere
B. A large spherical mass orbiting the sun
C. A large spherical mass orbiting the earth
D. Any large mass in space.


Galileo discovered four new spheres (called moons) orbiting:
A. Mercury
B. Venus
C. Earth
D. Jupiter

One significance of the discovery of the four Galilean moons of _________ was that:
A. They showed an object could orbit a body other than earth.
B. They showed everything in space is a sphere.
C. They showed that everything in space orbits the sun.
D. They showed that our moon orbits the earth.

[not reordered answers?]
Pluto was a suspicious inclusion on the list of planets because
A. it's mass is much lower than other planets
B. the eccentricity of its orbit is much greater than other planets
C. it is much farther away from the sun than other planets
D. it has no moons
E. A and B
F. A, B, and C
G. A, B, C, and D

The impetus for writing a new definition of a planet was:
A. Many many objects that could be potentially classified as planets had been discovered in a very short time
B. Ceres had been discovered recently and needed to be classified.
C. Pluto was the head of the IAU's least favorite Disney character.
D. Astronomers needed to decide if comets were planets.




Ceres is an object that was briefly considered a planet when it was first discovered in the 19th century.
It no longer fits the definition of a planet. Ceres is:
A. A large spherical object in the asteroid belt
B. An object that is outside the solar system
C. A large non-spherical object in the asteroid belt.
D. A large spherical object in the Kuiper belt.

Why did people initially classify Ceres as a planet?
A. It is large, spherical, and orbits the sun
B. It has several moons
C. It is made of rock
D. It is near other planets.



How many planets did the ancient Greeks have, (including things today not considered planets?
A. 5
B. 6
C. 7
D. 8
E. 9

Which of the following is NOT a planet in the ancient Greek definition (Assume the Greeks had been able to discover everything on the list.)?
A. Earth
B. Pluto
C. Mars
D. Jupiter
E. Neptune

[i should include one that includes the stars]


Pluto was eventually reclassified as a "dwarf planet" because:
A. It is too small
B. It has no moons
C. It is too far away from the sun
D. It is in the Kuiper Belt


For each of the following astronomers, determine their contribution [1/5 point each]

Ptolomey; Nicolaus Copernicus; Galileo Galilee; Tycho Brae; Johannes Kepler; Isaac Newton; Clyde Turnbough; Mike Brown
- Created a map of the universe in which all objects move around the earth
- Created a theory that objects move in circles around the sun, rather than the earth
- Discovered four moons of __[omitted]___ and effectively argued for a heliocentric universe
- Created a long record of locations of stars and planets that was the best available in the 17th century
- Mathematically analyzed the records of planets to determine three laws of planetary motion.
- Developed a theory of gravity and laws of motion which could then prove the laws of planetary motion developed by his predecessor.
- Discovered Pluto
- Discovered Eris and several similar Pluto-like objects (now called Kuiper Belt objects)

